---
layout: page
title: Picking A Coin
---

Assuming blockchain delivers on its potential, where will all the newly created
value be held? This is the million-bitcoin question. What should we look for in
a potential investment? Many of the guidelines for traditional fundamentals
investing are still applicable. For example, you need to analyse the product,
the market for the product, the company behind the project, its funding, the
team and their relevant experience, and so on. There are many books written on
such things, and I'm no expert, so I won't say more. But I will point out a
couple a things that are unique to evaluating cryptocurrency projects.

Governance
==========

Every blockchain project is going to tout "decentralisation" as a major
advantage of their project over traditional (non-blockchain) competitors.
But that word has multiple meanings; see the section on
[decentralisation](../../intro_to_crypto/4_decentralisation).
The nature of a project's decentralisation is key to its value as an
investment, because it affects both the quality of the product and the "rights"
that you, the potential token owner, will have. It is important to ask how the
particular form of decentralisation of a coin affects the end users and how it
affects you, the token holder.

For example, Ripple is decentralised only in the sense of being distributed:
there are multiple nodes validating transactions, but these nodes are
determined by a central authority - the Ripple company. This is probably good
for the Ripple target market, who are large financial institutions that want
support, legal guarantees, and so on from a company providing the service they
are using. It also makes Ripple fast because they sacrifice decentralised
governance for network speed. However, it may not be good for the token holder:
if you buy XRP, your account is under the control of the Ripple company, and
they can lock your account, take your money, do whatever they want, and you
have little recourse. (They are unlikely to take such extreme measures because
that would be bad for business. But their complete control, and ability to
change the rules at any time without consulting their coin holders, should be
a little worrying for the investor, I think.) Compare with Bitcoin, where there
is no central authority. With Bitcoin, you have complete control over your
account; nobody can take your money unless you lose your private key.

Tokenomics
==========

Just because a blockchain project is successful, that doesn't necessarily mean
its coin will attain a high value. Indeed, blockchains are just databases, so
building in a coin is not required at all; see, for example, the Hyperledger
platform. There are projects that do have coins, but where you can use the
blockchain without ever buying the coin, eg IOTA. Then there are coins where
it's necessary to buy the coin to use the platform, but the number of coins is
huge compared to the fees, and one only needs to own the coin for a matter of
seconds, eg Stellar.

The general point is this: we need to look carefully at the token economics
(tokenomics) to assess whether a coin/token is likely to have a high future
value. We need to think about demand and supply.

Supply
------
Most cryptocurrencies have a fixed maximum supply, eg 21 million for BTC.
However, some of those coins are not yet in circulation, eg BTC circulation is
currently a little over 17 million; the rest will enter the market when they
are generated by miners (the machines running the PoW consensus algorithm).
Until the maximum supply is reached, there will be some inflation.
If a coin's current supply is much less than its maximum, this is cause for
concern. In particular, many coins are often held back by the project founders.
If this is a large amount, and if there are no restrictions on when they can
sell them, there is the risk of the founders rapidly cashing out and crashing
the price of the coin.

Demand
------
Demand for a coin can increase either by more people wanting to buy (relative
to the number who want to sell), or through the existing people who want to buy
becoming more desperate to do so. So when we evaluate a coin as an investment,
we must ask why people would want to buy this coin. What purpose does the coin
serve within the project?

When demand is higher than supply, price increases - and vice versa. When they
balance, we have the equilibrium price. This is a dynamic equilibrium: people
are still constantly buying and selling - but they are doing it at the same
rate. So the equilibrium price is likely to be higher if people:
(a) Buy larger amounts the coin;
(b) Buy more often;
(c) Hold the coin for longer between buying and selling.
When assessing a coin, we need to think about the incentives for people to do
these things.

[ At present, the prices of most coins are set by speculation: people are
  placing their bets on which projects will be successful. This is highly
  whimsical: people get excited about something, its price goes up, then
  something new and shiny comes along, and everyone flocks there - and so on.
  In any market, price is partly determined by speculation. But as the market
  matures, prices should be determined more by the coin use case. This will
  likely result in some big future price changes. ]
